{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2821
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia-Italic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red83\green83\blue83;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c40000\c40000\c40000;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 There\'92s tough and then there\'92s Tuvalu. The number of messages I\'92ve sent about this place \'96the third least populous nation on Earth after Vatican City and Nauru \'96 over the past year is probably nearing the 50 mark. And though many of the people I contacted were willing to help, there was no getting round the fact that there was simply very little to suggest.\
Somewhere along the way, however, I got in touch with\'a0scholar, writer, photographer, restorer of antique radio equipment, and community volunteer\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://nanumea.net/Peter_McQuarrie.html"}}{\fldrslt \ul \strokec4 Peter McQuarrie}}. Though based in New Zealand, McQuarrie is married to a Tuvaluan and has connections with the Tuvaluan community in Auckland. He promised to ask around and duly came back with the suggestion of\'a0
\f1\i Tuvalu: a history
\f0\i0 , a book written by 17 Tuvaluans and published in 1983, a few years after the nation declared its independence.\
As I explained to McQuarrie, I have tended to disregard history books so far during this quest, regarding them as being some way out of the scope of literature. However, the collaborative nature of the work, and the fact that it chimed in with the genre of national-identity stories I\'92d already discovered in Pacific works like\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://ayearofreadingtheworld.com/2012/10/04/federated-states-of-micronesia-his-story/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \strokec4 Luelen Bernart\'92s\'a0
\f1\i The Book of Luelen}}
\f1\i \'a0
\f0\i0 and\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://ayearofreadingtheworld.com/2012/08/06/vanuatu-a-global-village/"}}{\fldrslt \ul \strokec4 Sethy John Regenvanu\'92s\'a0
\f1\i Laef Blong Mi}}, made me hesitate. In the end, I decided to give it a go.\
Written by people drawn from all walks of life on the nation\'92s nine islands during a series of workshops run by the University of the South Pacific, this collection of essays and personal accounts paints a picture of Tuvaluan life stretching back as far as folklore, hearsay and patchy historical records allow and reaching up to the time of writing. The pieces are divided by subject, with the writers tackling different aspects of the country\'92s culture, such as creation, religion, land, singing and dancing, and independence, in an effort to tell the story of their newly minted nation.\
As in several other Pacific Island works I\'92ve read this year, the writers often make little distinction between factual and symbolic truth. The accounts rove back and forth between myth and history, mingling tales about cannibals and magical eels with maps, diagrams, and explanations about the islands\'92 names, geography and politics. Indeed, the fantastic and the factual sometimes seem to blend together, with anecdotal accounts about chiefs who could charm fish and the story of the old woman who knew how to make it rain:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f1\i \cf2 \'91Taia Teuai, an old woman who died in 1982, was generally recognised as having inherited from her grandparents the power to make it rain. Shortly before her death she explained how she did it:\cb1 \
\cb3 \'91\'94If there is a long drought then I will make the rain fall. First I go to the bush to gather coconut leaves and flowers with which to weave myself a garland. Later, towards sunset, I put oil over my body and wearing a clean dress and with a garland on my head go down to the beach to meet a team of \'91rain-makers\'92. These are little clouds sailing towards the setting sun. I look at them and dance, and sing a song such as this one:\cb1 \
\cb3 \'91\'94Little clouds, little clouds!/Bring rain to me,/To moisten my body.\cb1 \
\cb3 \'91\'94In about three days time there would be heavy rain. This sort of rain can easily be recognised because the drops are much thicker than those of ordinary rain.\'94\'91\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0 \cf2 \cb3 This blending of anecdote and historical research gives rise to some wonderful insights into Tuvaluan life. We learn, for example, how to hitch a ride on a turtle\'92s back \'96 apparently the trick is to hang on without getting your fingers jammed between the neck and the shell or too near the mouth \'96 as well as the islanders\'92 rather alarming traditional methods of dealing with troublemakers, which involve a leaky canoe without a paddle. We also discover the toll that Western influences have taken on the nation, from the blackbirders who came to kidnap people to work in the Peruvian mines in the 19th century, through to the suppression of dancing and singing by the missionaries, and the ravages of world war two \'96 during which the Americans destroyed 22,000 of Nanumea\'92s 54,000 coconut trees building their defensive airfield.\
The subject matter may be varied, but through all the accounts runs a sense of the gravity of the task the writers are undertaking. This is established from the first page, with the foreword from prime minister Tomasi Puapua, who describes the book as being of \'91considerable significance in the history of the young nation of Tuvalu\'92 because the accounts are, for the first time, \'91written by Tuvaluans interpreting events as they themselves see them\'92. This is perhaps most movingly borne out in Enele Sapoago\'92s brief essay \'91Today and Tomorrow\'92 at the back of the book, which describes in fresh and passionate terms what independence means.\
That said, it\'92s hard not to feel the hand of the non-Tuvaluan workshop leaders on the shoulders of the writers at points. The essay form becomes stilted and awkward at times, and the later chapters dealing with events leading up to independence feel very dutiful and dense, and are often hard to read. In addition, it is difficult to ignore the fact that most of the historical source material the writers have to work with necessarily comes from the jottings of Western visitors to the archipelago. I sometimes found myself wondering who exactly the writing \'96 carried out in English \'96 was intended for.\
Nevertheless, there\'92s no question that this is an important book. As the first concerted effort of Tuvaluans to tell their story, it is informative, passionate and sometimes surprising. Nearly 30 years on from its publication, it\'92s surely time we had some more.\
}